you often hear about a species going
extinct what you don't so often hear
about though is the creation of a new
species which occurs to the process of
evolution it's called speciation when
one species branches into two that no
longer interbreed recently scientists
may have found a rare example of
speciation in action a population of
tropical butterflies that may be on its
way to a splint the larger goal of the
whole study was to understand how over
time one species turns into to what
we've been missing the whole time is
actually seeing the process happen
Marcus Crone forest is a biologist at
Harvard University he and his research
colleagues have been studying heliconius
butterflies in Ecuador one species that
is found in two different colors white
and yellow they've been comparing them
to the same butterflies in Costa Rica
where the two colors are actually two
different species one on each coast in
Ecuador butterflies of both colors live
and mate with each other but by studying
the insects in captivity the researchers
found an interesting twist we put all
these males into the cage where we had
two virgin females one of each color one
white and one yellow and then each day
we would spend hours and hours watching
the male's court the females but what we
really didn't expect when we went down
and we looked very carefully with the
mate choice experiments and found that
in fact the butterflies the different
colors actually have slightly different
preferences the yellow males prefer
yellow females while the white males
were ambivalent this subtle difference
may mean that this one species is
evolving into two distinct ones but to
verify that the butterflies are still in
fact one species the team turned to
genetics we did a genome once again and
that's exactly what we found that
genetically these these are a completely
mixed population it's a rare thing to
see an instance of speciation in action
and while it won't be verifiable until
the split has actually happened there's
a lot that can be learned from this
example of the butterflies
when you have one gene that's regulating
whether or not a color is going to be
either white or yellow and at the same
time appears to be offering its mating
behavior then you've got this
interesting connection between
morphology and chemistry and behavior
and not just in butterflies and other
across living organisms when you go from
one species to two there has to be this
sort of early in-between stage where
things are just starting to diverge and
so that's why this is sort of an
exciting potential example of that an
example of evolution caught in the act
for the National Science Foundation I'm
Lisa joy sagorsky